Document _home-assistant._tcp instance discovery service (#3130)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: docs/api/instance_discovery.md

---
title: "Instance discovery"
---

Home Assistant advertises itself on the local network as the `_home-assistant._tcp.local.` mDNS/Zeroconf service. Clients (for example the companion apps) can browse for this service to discover instances without asking the user for an address.

The service is registered once the [`frontend`](https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/frontend/) integration has been set up (or on start), so that the HTTP server is up and reachable when the record is published.

## Service record

| Field | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Service type | `_home-assistant._tcp.local.` |
| Instance name | `<location_name>.<service type>`. The `location_name` has `.` replaced with a space and is truncated to fit the 63-byte DNS label limit. On a name collision, Zeroconf appends a suffix (`allow_name_change`). |
| Host (server) | `<uuid>.local.`, where `<uuid>` is the instance ID. |
| Port | The HTTP server port (`8123` by default). |

> ## TXT properties

Reviewer: I wonder if using https://mermaid.ai/open-source/syntax/packet.html would make it more readable.

Author: Well, we are not really document packet structure on-the-wire, but merely the keys and its value on the mDNS application layer. The things might be arranged quite differently on the wire.

| Property | Meaning | Default |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `location_name` | Friendly instance name, from `hass.config.location_name`. | `Home` if no name is configured |
| `uuid` | The instance ID (`core.uuid`); a stable, opaque 32-character hex identifier. Also reused as the host name (`<uuid>.local.`). | Generated on first run |

> | `version` | Home Assistant Core version. The landing page shown during initial setup, before Core is running, advertises the same service with the sentinel version `0000.0.0`. | Current Core version |

Reviewer: I think it would make sense to add a small page in the core section about the version contract even if it's one line. @MartinHjelmare maybe it already exist somewhere? 
We could even add somehow the regex to use to match a Home Assistant core version.

Reviewer 2: I don't think there's such info in our developer docs about the core version.

Reviewer: Would you be against this?

Reviewer 2: No.

Author: While I think it makes sense to document the version contract for HA Core, I think this is also a super special case: It uses `0000.0.0` as a placeholder for "we don't know the version". Honestly, I'd rather prefer to not have that documented in general, but rather as a work around for just the mDNS announcement to satisfy the current regex used by the Android app.

If the version is not known, then null/None/nil is the right value IMHO :sweat_smile: .

Reviewer: What should be documented is what is a valid Home Assistant core version. We could (or not) add a note about the placeholder.

Reviewer: (not to be added in this PR but I think we could open a dedicated PR for this)

Author: I don't think this PR should document the Core version. The versioning scheme isn't specific to the mDNS DNS-SD announcement, it is a Home Assistant Core release process thing.

We do have this user documentation: https://www.home-assistant.io/faq/release/

Probably a new page we could file under misc? I can prepare something, but this should be reviewed carefully by the Core team. From what I understand you would want a regex or something, is this correct? The question quickly becomes should it satify old releases too (pre-calver)?

In any case, I think we should rule out 0000.0.0 as valid version. It is a work around to make deployed Android versions happy. We should allow to omit it. I updated the docs accordingly.

Author: Docs PR for the versioning scheme: https://github.com/home-assistant/developers.home-assistant/pull/3132

Author: The new Core version docs are now linked.

Reviewer: Thanks for the PR 👍🏻. Should we then avoid 0000 in the landing page?

| `internal_url` | Internal/LAN URL, resolved via `get_url(..., allow_external=False)`. | `""` if unavailable |
| `external_url` | External URL, resolved via `get_url(..., allow_internal=False)`. | `""` if unavailable |

> | `base_url` | Deprecated; kept for backward compatibility. Set to `external_url`, or `internal_url` if there is no external URL. | `""` if neither is available |

Reviewer: Currently base_url is not deprecated and used by Android. In core it first use external_url if available otherwise use internal_url.

Author: The `configuration.yaml` key [`base_url`](https://github.com/home-assistant/core/blob/d9a89beb3daaf68e3716f5f6e00cd22eed16e2eb/homeassistant/components/http/__init__.py#L109) is.

And the comment [here](https://github.com/home-assistant/core/blob/d9a89beb3daaf68e3716f5f6e00cd22eed16e2eb/homeassistant/components/zeroconf/__init__.py#L273) says: "Set old base URL based on external or internal". So I'd say its almost deprecated :sweat_smile: 

The `base_url` is computed based on `external_url` if available, otherwise `internal_url`.

Maybe we can move to implement the same logic on Android app and then formally deprecated `base_url`?

Reviewer: Covered in https://github.com/home-assistant/android/pull/6970 but let's keep it in the doc because it is required for old app.

| `requires_api_password` | Legacy flag. Always advertised as `True`. | `True` |
| `landingpage` | Present and set to `True` only on the record published by the [landing page](https://github.com/home-assistant/landingpage) before Core is set up. Absent on a running Core instance. | Not set |

> A TXT property value may be at most 230 bytes (`key=value` is capped at 255). Any value exceeding this is suppressed (replaced with an empty string) so it does not break advertisement.

Reviewer: Let's make this a `:::note`

The service is registered once the [`frontend`](https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/frontend/) integration has been set up (or on start), so that the HTTP server is up and reachable when the record is published.

## Service record

| Field | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Service type | `_home-assistant._tcp.local.` |
| Instance name | `<location_name>.<service type>`. The `location_name` has `.` replaced with a space and is truncated to fit the 63-byte DNS label limit. On a name collision, Zeroconf appends a suffix (`allow_name_change`). |
| Host (server) | `<uuid>.local.`, where `<uuid>` is the instance ID. |
| Port | The HTTP server port (`8123` by default). |

## TXT properties

| Property | Meaning | Default |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `location_name` | Friendly instance name, from `hass.config.location_name`. | `Home` if no name is configured |
| `uuid` | The instance ID (`core.uuid`); a stable, opaque 32-character hex identifier. Also reused as the host name (`<uuid>.local.`). | Generated on first run |

> | `version` | [Home Assistant Core version](../versioning.md). Optional: Clients should treat optional as version currently not known. It typically means Core is not yet installed (e.g. landing page shown during initial setup). Currently the landing page advertises with the sentinel version `0000.0.0`. This is not a valid Home Assistant Core version it is merly used to work around limitations of the current Android app. | Current Core version |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `version` | [Home Assistant Core version](../versioning.md). Optional: Clients should treat optional as version currently not known. It typically means Core is not yet installed (e.g. landing page shown during initial setup). Currently the landing page advertises with the sentinel version `0000.0.0`. This is not a valid Home Assistant Core version, but is merely used to work around limitations of the current Android app. | Current Core version |
```
